Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today
we're going to look at why infinite sets
don't really exist. I'm going to start
to try to explain that, even though it's
a very controversial position and most of my
fellow mathematicians will not agree with me.
Let's first talk a little bit about regular
set theory, which is a useful addition to our
tool chest. A set is a collection of mathematical
objects, and it's agreed that all the objects in
the set have to be distinct and the order in which
we present them is unimportant. So here's a set:
. It happens to be the set of all
odd numbers less than 10. It has five elements in
it. These we can match; each one of the elements
with a 1, so we have a string of ones which we
usually call 5. We say the size of S is 5.
Here's another set, P, which consists of the
prime numbers less than 10. Its size is 4. There
are two fundamental things we can do with sets:
we can take their intersection, that is, create
a new set which consists of those elements which
are common to both sets, or we can create the
union, which is the set of elements which are
either in one set or in another. So this kind
of set theory is useful and very practical.
But in the 1870s, Georg Cantor, a German
mathematician, introduced a dramatic new
suggestion. He said, why don't we consider also
infinite sets? This caused a lot of consternation,
it caused a lot of discussion and controversy,
and it ultimately became a very popular way of
thinking about a lot of mathematics, so much
so that it is now the orthodoxy. Let's have
a look at the simplest example of an infinite
set. Here is the set that's usually called N,
standing for natural numbers. It's a set whose
elements are all the natural numbers—all in
quotes—1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8... you keep
going and keep going and keep going until
the end of time and beyond. And all the natural
numbers are contained in those brackets. That,
according to Cantor, was a new mathematical
object, which is now on a par with, say,
the number 5 or the set S that we defined earlier.
We can manipulate that object, we can use it
in other mathematical formulations, we can do
things with it just like we can with numbers.
Well, this was historically very unprecedented.
For thousands of years previous to Cantor,
people had been very nervous and respectful
about the magnitude and the immensity of
infinite sequences. So, to the ancient Greeks,
for example, the natural numbers were a sequence
that progressed beyond our view. Looking further
and further in the sequence required more and more
powerful techniques, but nowhere can you enclose
all of those integers in a completed whole. That
was the traditional point of view. But Cantor
said, no, no, we can. And not surprisingly,
he generated a lot of controversy. There were
many very prominent opponents of Cantor's theory,
including Kronecker, Poincaré, Brouwer,
Weyl, and others. This list includes
some of the greatest mathematicians of the last
hundred years. It became clear also that Gauss,
who lived before Cantor's time, had also
expressed an opinion on these matters,
and he was also opposed to the idea of
considering infinity as a completed whole.
On top of these objections, Cantor also had
to deal with paradoxes. People started to
discover paradoxes in the new theory that
Cantor had created. So there are famous
paradoxes due to Burali-Forti, to Russell, and
indeed to Cantor himself. So by around 1900,
the new theory was immersed in difficulties
and was being attacked on all sides,
and at that time, it probably
looked like it was doomed.
Alright, now if we fast forward to 2024, we find a
remarkable change in circumstances. Now, infinite
sets are universally acknowledged as making sense.
Almost all modern mathematical objects are defined
in terms of infinite sets. So this object here,
which many of you will recognize as a circle,
according to a pure mathematician, this is
actually an infinite set of points. You can't see
them all, but there is actually an infinite set
of points there. A square, that's also an infinite
set of points. So is even a lowly line segment.
A torus, or donut, is an infinite set of points.
A function like f(x) = x^2 is defined in terms
of an infinite set of points. If a mathematician
looked at a tomato like this, probably they
would see an infinite amount of tomato points.
How can this come about? How is it possible
that there was such a dramatic change? Well,
in my opinion, it's because of a distortion
of mathematical logic. Currently, we have a
theory of so-called axiomatic set theory,
where mathematicians build philosophical
castles in the sky and they proclaim that
these make sense because they say, well,
let's just assume that they do. We'll assume
that they do by stating certain axioms that
we'll phrase in mathematical language to
make them sound relatively legitimate. Most
modern mathematicians do not understand
these axioms. In fact, they hardly ever
use them. There's only a small cohort of
mathematicians that do. But nevertheless,
everybody pays lip service to them and
acknowledges that no doubt they are correct. It's
one of my purposes to take the air out of this
inflated theory and to bring it down to earth.
Right now, however, is not quite the time to do
it because this entire development requires a
little bit more sophistication and more careful
analysis. What I do want to show you, however,
is that even if we restrict ourselves to the
natural numbers, an ordinary person can appreciate
that it doesn't make sense to talk about this as
a completed whole. And the way we're going to do
that is by looking at bigger and bigger numbers.
Once we do that, then we get an appreciation for
just the immensity of this infinite sequence.
So next time, we're going to look at the natural
numbers and extremely big numbers. I hope you'll
join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks.